JUDY WOODRUFF: Good evening. I'm
Judy Woodruff.
ALISON STEWART: And I'm Alison
Stewart.
JUDY WOODRUFF: On the "NewsHour"
tonight:
JOSEPH BIDEN, Vice President of
the United
States: Grow up, Donald. Grow
up. Time to
be an adult. You're president.
JUDY WOODRUFF: I sit down with
Vice President
Joe Biden at the White House to
talk president-elect
Trump, Russian hacking and look
ahead to the
future of the Democratic Party.
ALISON STEWART: Also ahead: What
drives you?
Paul Solman helps make sense of
the science
behind motivation, and how it
can be used
to create happier, more
productive workers.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And Jeffrey
Brown's conversation
with the stars of the new movie
"Hidden Figures"
about the African-American women
behind NASA's
success in the '50s and '60s.
TARAJI P. HENSON, Actress: This
one is important.
This one is important on a deep
level because
it's a part of history that has
been overlooked.
You know, this is more important
than anything
I have done in my career.
ALISON STEWART: All that and
more on tonight's
"PBS NewsHour."
(BREAK)
ALISON STEWART: The director of
national intelligence
says he has -- quote -- "very
high confidence"
that Russia hacked Democratic
Party computers
in a bid to interfere with the
U.S. election.
James Clapper spoke at a Senate
hearing today
with Admiral Mike Rogers of the
National Security
Agency. He also addressed
president-elect
Trump's criticism of U.S.
intelligence agencies.
SEN. CLAIRE MCCASKILL (D),
Missouri: Who actually
is the benefactor of someone who
is about
to become the commander in chief
trashing
the intelligence community?
JAMES CLAPPER, National
Intelligence Director:
I think there is an important
distinction
here between healthy skepticism,
which policy-makers,
to include policy-maker number
one, should
always have for intelligence,
but I think
there's a difference between
skepticism and
disparagement.
ALISON STEWART: Clapper
confirmed that President
Obama has now received a final
report on the
issue.
Meanwhile, it was widely
reported that former
Indiana Senator Dan Coats is the
president-elect's
choice for the next director of
national intelligence.
Mr. Trump also walked back from
his criticism
of intelligence agencies. He
tweeted -- quote
-- "The media lies to make it
look like I'm
against intelligence, when, in
fact, I'm a
big fan."
JUDY WOODRUFF: In Turkey, a
senior official
says police are closing in on
the gunman who
killed 39 people at an Istanbul
nightclub
on New Year's Eve. The deputy
prime minister
said today he's likely a member
of the Muslim
Uighur minority in China and
part of a specialized
terror cell.
Meanwhile, in Iraq, new bombings
killed at
least 27 people today in
Baghdad.
ALISON STEWART: The Obama
administration released
four more prisoners from
Guantanamo today.
That's despite president-elect
Trump's vow
to keep the military prison
open. Those released
were from Yemen, and had been
held more than
14 years, but never charged.
They were sent
to Saudi Arabia; 35 inmates
remain at Guantanamo.
JUDY WOODRUFF: The battle over
the fate of
Obamacare's had president-elect
Trump firing
barbs today at Senate Minority
Leader Chuck
Schumer. In a series of tweets,
Mr. Trump
criticized Democrats in general
and branded
Schumer the -- quote -- "head
clown."
The New York senator answered
during a morning
news conference.
SEN. CHUCK SCHUMER (D-NY),
Minority Leader:
I would say to the
president-elect and the
Republicans that this is not a
time for calling
names. It's time for them to
step up to the
plate if they want to repeal and
show us what
they'd replace it with.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Vice President
Biden also commented,
and you will see that shortly in
our interview.
Meanwhile, House Speaker Paul
Ryan said today
that Republicans plan to act
this year on
both repealing and replacing the
president's
health care law.
ALISON STEWART: An assault in
Chicago that
was live-streamed on Facebook
drew national
attention today. Police charged
four black
suspects with hate crimes
against a mentally
challenged white male. The video
showed the
victim being threatened with a
knife and shoved
down. He was later beaten and
forced to drink
from a toilet. As the attack
progressed, the
assailants yelled obscenities
about whites
and president-elect Trump.
JUDY WOODRUFF: President Obama
is touting
progress on criminal justice
reform during
his tenure and urging more. He
wrote about
it today in The Harvard Law
Review and said
-- quote -- "How we treat
citizens who make
mistakes, pay their debt to
society reflects
who we are as a people."
Mr. Obama served as The Law
Review's first
black president in 1990.
ALISON STEWART: On Wall Street
today, big
banks and department stores
struggled, but
online retailer Amazon surged.
The Dow Jones
industrial average lost nearly
43 points to
close at 19899. The Nasdaq rose
almost 11
points to a new record close,
and the S&P
500 slipped a point.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And there's word
that living
near a lot of traffic could make
you more
prone to dementia. A Canadian
study found
the risk is 7 percent greater
for people living
within 55 yards of high-traffic
roads. Researchers
say that it could come from
breathing the
pollution in car exhaust fumes.
The findings
appear in the medical journal
"The Lancet."
ALISON STEWART: Still to come on
the "NewsHour":
Judy's interview with Vice
President Joe Biden;
the secret to boosting workers'
productivity;
and much more.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Now to my
conversation with
Vice President Joe Biden.
We sat down at the White House
earlier today
and began by discussing the
future of the
Obama administration's signature
legislative
achievement, the Affordable Care
Act.
JOSEPH BIDEN, Vice President of
the United
States: I don't know what's
going to happen.
I think, as I said last night,
it was reported
in the press, speaking to
Democratic members
-- newly elected members of the
House, that
I think they're going to inherit
the wind
here.
You know, all the things that
they said they
dislike about the Affordable
Care Act, they
are all able to be adjusted if
-- and we knew
when we passed the act that we'd
have to constantly
see how it worked and improve
it.
For example, making sure that
there are significant
more -- more subsidies for young
people to
be able to get into the
Affordable Care Act,
bringing down overall cost.
But, at any rate, I think
they're going to
find, when they repeal it, all
of a sudden,
you're going to be reporting on
your program
at night on PBS about so and so
died because
they got their insurance cut
off, would no
longer cover them. They --
you're going to
find out women are paying more
than men again
for the same insurance.
You're going to find out that
preexisting
conditions are -- are able to
disqualify you
or make the cost of insurance
prohibitive.
And so they're going to have --
that's why
they're having a problem now.
They have no
replacement.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, do you think
Democrats
should work with them to...
(CROSSTALK)
JOSEPH BIDEN: Well, I think
Democrats should
say, look, let's take a look at
what you have
right now. What don't you like
about it? Let's
see if we can fix it. Let's see.
Talk to us.
Tell us what your ideas are.
But this wholesale -- now, look,
the fundamental
disagreement most Republicans
have is they
don't think health care is a
right. They think
it is a privilege, not a right.
We believe health care is a
basic right. If
education -- you're entitled to
an education,
why wouldn't you be entitled to
adequate health
care, period?
JUDY WOODRUFF: But based on
conversations
of, the president -- we know the
president
has spoken with president-elect
Trump about
this.
JOSEPH BIDEN: Yes.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Based on that,
what parts of
it do you think may actually
survive?
JOSEPH BIDEN: None of the good
parts can survive
with out the funding pieces of
it. And the
part they say they don't like is
the funding.
There's a reason why. There's a
reason why
it's constructed the way it is.
You can't
go to insurance companies and
say, you know
what, we're not going to change
anything having
to do with the pool from which
you -- you
draw your people. We're not
going to do anything.
But guess what? You can no
longer allow for
preexisting conditions to
disqualify somebody.
And they go, oh, OK, how do I
pay for that?
So, you know, they talk -- it's
obvious they
don't know much about it. Mr.
Trump's a good
man, but he doesn't know much
about the health
care system.
JUDY WOODRUFF: But they're very
serious about
undoing it.
JOSEPH BIDEN: Oh, they're very
serious about
undoing it.
So, like I said, lots of luck in
your senior
year. Undo it. See what happens.
JUDY WOODRUFF: More broadly, the
Republicans
are saying they want to
dismantle much of
the entire Obama-Biden legacy,
legislation,
regulations. What are you most
worried that
they may do?
JOSEPH BIDEN: I think they're
kidding themselves
if they think they can do away
with legislation
relating to the progressive
values we've built
into the law.
The public has moved beyond
politicians. For
example, I'm not worried about
them repealing
protections for the LGBT
community, because
the public is beyond that. I'm
not worried
about them being able to change
the way in
which we have reached out to and
provided
many more opportunities for
women.
And I -- but here's what does
concern me.
What concerns me is that they
will make some
judgments in the foreign policy
area, without
having thought it through, that
may cause
a lot of problems, for example,
Ukraine, or
the Northern Triangle here in
the hemisphere,
or dealing with Colombia.
Unless you are very
sophisticated about what
your actions or inactions -- let
me say it
another way. I was asked to go
down to Australia
several months ago to meet with
the new -- same
prime minister, but with a new
coalition,
and to re -- not reestablish,
but make sure
that we had close relationships.
While I was there, I got a call
from the -- from
the president of Latvia, saying:
You've got
to come to the Baltic states
because Mr. Trump,
during the campaign, said that,
you know,
they may not protect us against
the Russians.
So, words matter. I'm not
suggesting that's
his position. But you have a lot
of folks
around the parts of the world
that have relationships
with us now that, based on some
of the rhetoric
that's occurred, if they follow
through with
the rhetoric by nonaction, could
cause -- have
some serious diplomatic and --
and physical
consequences.
That's what worries me most of
anything.
JUDY WOODRUFF: You're worried
more about foreign
policy than about domestic
policy?
JOSEPH BIDEN: I am.
JUDY WOODRUFF: What they could
undo domestically.
JOSEPH BIDEN: Because I -- I...
JUDY WOODRUFF: The environment
and the rest
of it.
JOSEPH BIDEN: I -- look, they
will probably
do some very rash things
relative to the environment.
But they, again, will reap the
whirlwind.
The public has moved beyond the
positions
that these fellows have taken.
So, in the
near term, that may happen, but
they'll pay
a heavy price if they do that.
For example, they could come
along and decide
that they're not going to have
the -- you
know, enforce the clean air
standards. They
could do that, but there will be
a backlash.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Let me ask you
about the Supreme
Court. You chaired the Senate
Judiciary Committee
for eight years, so you know
very well what
it means when the
Republican-controlled Senate
sat on the nomination of Merrick
Garland to
fill that ninth seat on the
court, sat on
it for almost 10 months.
JOSEPH BIDEN: First time ever.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Once the
president-elect, then
President Trump, chooses
someone, should the
Democrats do the same thing and
oppose and
refuse to go along?
JOSEPH BIDEN: No.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Or should they,
thinking you
need to fill that vacancy on the
court, go
along?
JOSEPH BIDEN: I think they
should -- look,
the Constitution says the
president shall
nominate, not maybe he could,
maybe he can't,
he shall nominate. Implicit in
the Constitution
is that the Senate will act on
its constitutional
responsibility and give its
advice and consent.
No one is required to vote for
the nominee.
But they, in my view, are
required to give
the nominee a hearing and a
vote. I -- it's
been my policy since I've been
in the United
States Senate, and I presided
over more Supreme
Court nominees than anyone in
history, anyone
living.
And never once, even the ones
that I've disagreed
with, have they been denied a
hearing. And
so I think the Democrats should
not take up
what I think is a fundamentally
unconstitutional
notion that the Republicans --
Republicans
initiated 10 months ago. I think
they should
see who they nominate and vote
on them.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, you've seen
the list
of names that president-elect
Trump has put
out there. Are any of them, to
you, acceptable,
and are any unacceptable?
JOSEPH BIDEN: Well I -- I'm not
going to comment
on -- and to be honest with you,
I don't know
all that he's put out there.
I've been having
trouble enough following him on
some other
things.
But -- so, I'm not prepared to
comment on
any one of his nominees.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Come back to
foreign policy.
Have you seen now the report by
the intelligence
community on Russian hacking of
the Democrats
during the...
JOSEPH BIDEN: Yes, I have. Yes,
I've read
it.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And?
JOSEPH BIDEN: There's
overwhelming consensus
in the community and
overwhelming evidence
supplied by the community that
Russia did
engage in an effort to impact on
the elections.
There is no evidence that they
actually tampered
with voting booths or tampered
with voting
rolls. But there is clear
evidence that they
-- in fact, they were engaged in
activities
designed to try to impact on the
outcome of
the election.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Evidence of any
American cooperation
with the Russians in doing that?
JOSEPH BIDEN: I'm not going to
comment on
that, Judy. I don't want to
comment on any
of the detail of the report.
There will be
an unclassified version that
will be released
very shortly, and it will lay
out in bold
print what they know.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Will the American
people learn
something new from this?
JOSEPH BIDEN: I think it will
probably confirm
what a lot of the American
people think.
But it will -- it will state
clearly that
the Russians did, as a matter of
policy, attempt
to affect and -- three things.
One, it attempted
to discredit the U.S. electoral
process by
implying that or laying the
foundation for,
it is not on the level.
Two, it -- there's evidence that
they -- there
was an attempt to hurt Mrs.
Clinton. But there's
also evidence that there was
wider hacking
than some people thought.
So, the idea that the Russians
were not involved
in an effort to engage in our
electoral process
is simply not able to be
sustained. They were.
(CROSSTALK)
JUDY WOODRUFF: Excuse me.
In connection with that, the
criticism by
the president-elect of the
intelligence community
in this country, belittling of
the intelligence
community, do you think that's
just politics,
or do you think it's dangerous?
JOSEPH BIDEN: I think it's
dangerous.
I hope -- some very smart people
around him,
like General Mattis and some
others. For a
president not to have confidence
in, not to
be prepared to listen to the
myriad of intelligence
agencies, from Defense
Intelligence, to the
CIA, et cetera, is -- is
absolutely mindless.
It's just mindless.
How would you -- now, can you
disagree? Can
you ask for more detail? Can you
question
whether or not there is a
disagreement among
the various intelligence
agencies? That's
all legitimate.
But the idea that -- that you
know more than
the intelligence community
knows, it's a little
like saying, I know more about
physics than
my professor. Now, I didn't read
the book.
I just know I know more.
I mean, it's not a -- it's
worrisome. I'm
assuming it will change.
JUDY WOODRUFF: If -- if what the
Russians
did is so serious, should there
be more retaliation
than what the administration has
just enacted?
JOSEPH BIDEN: I -- when the
question was,
would we respond to the hacking
over a month
ago, I said, at our -- our time
and choosing,
we would. Some of what we did,
you will know,
and some, you will not know.
And we've done both, things you
do not know
and things that are known, like
expelling...
JUDY WOODRUFF: That were
announced.
JOSEPH BIDEN: Yes.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Will we know
those things that
weren't...
JOSEPH BIDEN: Hope not.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Syria, will that
go down as
one of the administration's
great failures,
do you think? And is the U.S.
now impotent
to affect the outcome there?
JOSEPH BIDEN: No. No.
It is not a failure. The -- to
be a failure,
the -- there was -- you would
assume there
was an alternative that could
have been offered
that would have benefited or
been great -- in
the greater interest of the
security of the
United States.
If you notice, there wasn't
anybody in either
political party ever talking
about putting
troops on the ground. If you
notice, there
wasn't anybody talking about --
there was
no plan put forward by anyone
that demonstrated
that there was a sufficient,
coherent nucleus
of democrats, with a small D,
who were in
opposition to the Assad regime
who would,
given the requisite training and
capability,
have the ability to be able to
take on both
extreme elements of the Sunnis,
meaning Al-Qaeda,
as well as ISIS, as well as
Nusra, and take
on the Assad regime at the same
time.
And so our focus has been the
dismantling
of the so-called caliphate, the
of ISIS being able to occupy
territory and
govern like they were a
nation-state, like
they were a government.
They have lost enormous amounts
of ground.
And I predict to you, before
June, there will
be no such place where they
occupy anywhere
in Syria, as well as Iraq.
The caliphate will have been
dismantled. It
will still be a problem, but
that has been
our focus, because that is the
greatest existential
threat to U.S. interests.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And the
president, President
Assad, will still be in power?
JOSEPH BIDEN: That remains to be
seen.
And why I say that is, we've
been saying from
the beginning, like most others,
that this
needs to be a negotiated
settlement. The Russians
appear to be -- appear to be --
in conjunction
with the Turks, as well as the
Iranians, appear
to be at a point where they are
realizing,
for their interests as well,
Assad being in
power indefinitely is not in
their interests.
So, it remains to be seen. We've
been trying
to put together, in multiple
fora, ability
to bring a negotiated settlement
to this.
It's still a reach, but we'll
see.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Looking back to
the election,
why did Hillary Clinton lose in
middle-class,
working-class places like
Wilkes-Barre, Pennsylvania,
close to where you grew up? And
what economic
message could have changed the
outcome?
JOSEPH BIDEN: Well, first of
all, I'm not
-- there's a false choice being
put forward
by some Democrats now. Either we
double down
on our progressive values, or we
go out there
and talk about the middle class
and the working
class. I've never found them
inconsistent.
They go together.
The reason I'm a Democrat is
because the essence
of the Democratic Party is an
abhorrence for
the abuse of power on the one
hand, and the
notion that everyone's entitled
to be treated
with dignity. That message never
got through.
I remember going -- I was flying
to Cleveland.
I did 83 events. I was flying to
Cleveland.
I was wondering why I was so
upset about the
way the campaign was going. This
was about
three weeks out.
And it hit me that, because of
the outrageous
nature of the way in which the
things that
Trump was saying, we never got
to substance.
You can't find me any of your
viewers who
can define for you what
Hillary's free tuition
plan college plan was about. We
never got
to it. And...
JUDY WOODRUFF: Whose fault was
that?
JOSEPH BIDEN: Well, I think it
was the -- I
think it was multiple faults.
I don't think that the campaign
was clear
enough. I don't think you guys
were ready
to cover it. You know, you look
at what the
Annenberg School and other
studies have shown,
there's hardly any coverage of a
single issue,
of a substantive issue.
JUDY WOODRUFF: But you also said
the campaign
wasn't clear enough.
JOSEPH BIDEN: Well, I don't
think -- I've
been the odd man out here.
I -- you know, I didn't hear
anybody talk
about the plight of that guy who
works on
the assembly line and his wife
is a hostess,
they make 90,000 bucks a year,
have two kids,
and they're hurting. They're
scared.
We don't show enough respect. We
don't show
enough. We don't speak enough to
-- my dad
used to have an expression. He'd
say, "I don't
expect the government to solve
my problem,
Joe, but at least I expect them
to understand
it."
We were not clear enough in
making it clear
we understood the pressure they
were under
and we had concrete solutions to
it. We never
got to them.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Could you have
beaten Donald
Trump?
JOSEPH BIDEN: Oh, I don't --
that's -- I have
no idea.
I mean, you know, it's easy to
say now. People
say that. But who knows, who
knows whether
I could have beaten Donald
Trump.
JUDY WOODRUFF: But you're seeing
-- seem very
clear on what the message should
have been.
JOSEPH BIDEN: Oh, I -- I was...
(LAUGHTER)
JOSEPH BIDEN: I've been clear on
that message
for a long time.
This handle I've been given of
Middle Class
Joe, I know, in Washington,
that's not meant
to be a compliment. It means
you're not sophisticated.
But the reason I talk so much
about the middle
class, it's the glue that holds
this country
together. It really is. And we
don't speak
enough to their legitimate
concerns.
JUDY WOODRUFF: The future of the
Democratic
Party, you're talking about it
right now,
but it's now less -- fewer seats
in state
capitals around the country.
JOSEPH BIDEN: Yes.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Not only lost the
Congress,
but lost the White House.
What does the party -- what
needs to happen
now?
JOSEPH BIDEN: I think we just
have to remember
who the heck we are and speak to
who we are
and what we believe. The
American public agrees
with us on almost every basic
issue.
But here's what's going to
happen, in my view,
Judy. The very issues that
didn't get covered
are going to get covered
extremely thoroughly
now. You know why? This is going
to be the
most contentious Congress you've
seen since
you and I have been doing this
business.
And so what's going to happen?
Just like their
initial effort to do away with
an oversight,
you know, committee on -- on
ethics, well,
guess what? If they had talked
about that
during the campaign, they'd pay
no price for
it. But now they're going to
implement it.
When they go and take on health
care, when
they take on Medicare, when they
take on aid
to education, when they take on
college tuition,
when they take -- we're going to
-- you're
going to cover it. You're going
to be -- you're
going to maybe even have an
old-timer like
me talking about it on your
program.
And people are going to go, oh,
that's what
these guys want to do? This is
what the Democrats
are? That's what...
(CROSSTALK)
JUDY WOODRUFF: Excuse me.
JUDY WOODRUFF: But you referred
to this a
minute ago.
Democrats are dealing with a new
reality in
how this new president will
communicate, the
tweets.
Just today, he tweeted -- he
called the Senate
minority leader, Chuck Schumer,
the head clown.
Last week, he said -- he said
just like: "Doing
my best to disregard the many
inflammatory
President O statements and
roadblocks. Thought
it was going to be a smooth
transition. NOT!"
-- in all caps and an
exclamation point.
JOSEPH BIDEN: Grow up, Donald.
Grow up. Time
to be an adult. You're
president. You got
to do something. Show us what
you have. You're
going to propose the
legislation. We're going
to get to debate it. Let the
public decide.
Let them vote in Congress. Let's
see what
happens.
It's going to be much clearer
what he's for
and against and what we're for
and against,
now that it's going to get down
to actually
discussing in detail these
issues that affect
people's lives.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Two quick things.
The Cancer Moonshot.
JOSEPH BIDEN: Yes.
JUDY WOODRUFF: You started that
in memory
of your son Beau.
You're now going to be launching
a nonprofit
to do, among other things, look
at the cost
of cancer drugs. What would you
consider success
when it comes to the price of
cancer medicine?
JOSEPH BIDEN: Well, look, that's
a small part
of this.
The overwhelming part of this is
to continue
to instill this overwhelming
sense of urgency
in cooperating in terms of
breaking down silos,
in terms of -- look, the medical
-- when Nixon
declared the war on cancer, he
had no army.
He had no tools. He had no
anything, except
good intentions.
And there was one model,
institutional model.
It was Jonas Salk in the
library, in -- excuse
me -- a laboratory -- that was
finding the
silver bullet.
We've now found out 45 years
later that it's
enormous collaboration that's
required. But
the institutional instruments
have not changed.
Judy, if I could get every
single cancer genome
sequence that has been
sequenced, if I could
ever put it in one repository,
we have the
capacity to do a million billion
calculations
per second. We'll be able to
find out more
than -- in 10 minutes more than
it would take
10 Nobel laureates 10 years to
find out about
the patterns of cancer and the
cures for cancer.
These are the things that I'm
working on most.
Drug prices are a problem.
Access is a problem.
But, because it is so
celebrated, that issue,
I -- I want to put it in
perspective. If I
could solve everything but that,
I would solve
everything but that.
We're going to work on that as
well.
JUDY WOODRUFF: You'll be doing
Cancer Moonshot,
affiliating with two
universities.
JOSEPH BIDEN: Yes.
JUDY WOODRUFF: You'll be -- I
guess Lunch
Pail Joe is going to become Ivy
League Professor
Biden? Is that...
JOSEPH BIDEN: Well, I'm going to
-- I'm going
back to my alma mater, where my
heart is,
University of Delaware. They've
been so good
to me. I'm going to be doing all
domestic
policy out of there.
And I'm going to be doing
diplomatic and foreign
policy out of Penn.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Less time for
politics?
JOSEPH BIDEN: Well, that is
politics to me.
They're the issues.
Look, every single morning since
I've been
27 years old, I've got up and
someone's handed
me a card, like the one I have
in my pocket,
that has a schedule on it of all
the things
I'm going to do.
I don't know what to do if I
didn't have that
card.
I mean, these are the things I
care about.
And it's a -- my dad in another
expression,
he said: "A lucky person gets up
in the morning
and puts both feet on the floor,
knows what
they're about to do, and thinks
it still matters."
I think this stuff really
matters.
So, I'm going to be able to take
some of the
intellectual horsepower out of
the vice president's
office, and I'm going to have
two platforms
in which I can hire those people
in -- at
Delaware and at Penn, and work
on the issues
that are of overwhelming concern
to me still.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, leaving
government after,
what, almost half-a-century of
public service.
JOSEPH BIDEN: Oh, geez, don't
say -- that's
an awful thing to say. But
you're right.
JUDY WOODRUFF: What -- how does
that feel?
JOSEPH BIDEN: I -- I -- I don't
know.
I must tell you, it was -- like
I said, since
I've been a 27-year-old kid,
I've -- this
has been the essence of my life.
And -- and
I -- I just know that I want to
stay engaged.
And I think that I will have a
platform to
do that.
And that will also affect public
policy. And
that's what -- that's why I got
involved in
government in the first place.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And you won't be
shy about
speaking out?
JOSEPH BIDEN: No, I won't be shy
about speaking
out.
I never got involved in it for
the money,
as my net worth will show you.
So -- and I
still don't have that interest.
I'm interested
in doing the things that I've
been doing.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Vice President
Joe Biden, thank
you very much.
JOSEPH BIDEN: Thank you Judy. I
appreciate
it.
ALISON STEWART: Stay with us.
Coming up on the "NewsHour": the
great risks
and rewards of editing human
DNA; and the
unsung black women behind NASA's
first manned
orbit around the Earth.
But first: With a new year comes
new resolutions
both at home and at work, but
many of us aren't
motivated enough to get through
our to-do
lists. In fact, more than half
of American
workers feel disengaged at their
jobs.
Our economics correspondent,
Paul Solman,
looks at what could motivate us
into action.
It's part of his weekly series,
Making Sense,
which airs Thursdays on the
"NewsHour."
DAN ARIELY, Behavioral
Economist: I think
we could get people to both be
more productive
and happier.
PAUL SOLMAN: Behavioral
economist Dan Ariely,
who's joined a chorus of
economists bemoaning
America's productivity slowdown.
DAN ARIELY: We're less
productive as individuals.
We're less productive as
companies, and we're
more miserable.
PAUL SOLMAN: But Ariely thinks
there's something
corporate America can do to
boost productivity:
better understand human
motivation.
DAN ARIELY: Motivation,
basically getting
people to be happy at work,
everybody -- everybody
benefits.
PAUL SOLMAN: Thus his new book,
"Payoff."
But before the specifics, a bit
of backstory.
As a teen, Ariely spent three
years in the
hospital, horribly burned. But
it was just
recently, when a stranger called
him after
her son suffered a similar fate,
that he realized
why people make an effort.
DAN ARIELY: And she asked me to
send her son
an optimistic note about life. I
didn't know
what to say. You know, I -- he
was so badly
burnt and...
PAUL SOLMAN: As badly burned as
you had been?
DAN ARIELY: Worse.
PAUL SOLMAN: Even worse?
DAN ARIELY: Worse -- worse than
I was.
And I wasn't sure that staying
alive is better
for him than not. Pain is just
terrible, pain
and desperation and
hopelessness. And if it
happened again today, I wouldn't
want to continue.
PAUL SOLMAN: Recalling his own
cruel trial,
Ariely broke down, out of the
patient's sight.
DAN ARIELY: And, eventually, I
said, you know,
life is going to be difficult
and complex,
and you will never have a normal
life. But
I also told him that technology
is on the
side of the disabled, because we
can do things
that we wouldn't be able to do
without it.
Even though it was a very
difficult time with
this kid, right, it gave me a
sense of, I'm
giving back, I'm helping
somebody else, and
I'm connecting with this kid,
and I'm doing
something that I'm supposed to
do in some
ways.
PAUL SOLMAN: The lesson for
Ariely: Our behavior
is driven by emotion, not the
conventional
rewards like money.
ALEC BALDWIN, Actor: Have I got
your attention
now?
PAUL SOLMAN: And he thinks
corporate America
would do well to take note.
ALEC BALDWIN: We're adding a
little something
to this month's sales contest.
As you all
know, first prize is a Cadillac
Eldorado.
Anybody want to see second
prize? The second
prize is a set of steak knives.
Third prize
is, you're fired.
PAUL SOLMAN: Money, threats of
no money, Ariely
has found they don't inspire
hard work.
Consider this experiment he ran
at a computer
chip production line in Israel.
Workers who
made their chip quota got either
$30 or a
voucher for pizza to take home
to the family
or a "well-done" text from the
boss.
We asked New Yorkers to guess
the experiment's
results. Which do you think
would be most
motivating?
WOMAN: The voucher for the
pizza.
MAN: Cash in the wallet. It
always works.
MAN: The text from the boss.
That would motivate
me more.
WOMAN: The bonus.
MAN: Well done more often is
definitely more
motivational.
PAUL SOLMAN: In the actual
experiment, workers
who made the quota and received
the $30 and
those that got a pizza voucher
and the group
that got a compliment were all
more productive
than workers who received
nothing.
DAN ARIELY: Money was slightly
worse than
the other two, but they were all
much better.
PAUL SOLMAN: But, on the second
day, when
the workers who'd gotten the $30
were not
paid a bonus, regardless of how
many chips
they turned out, their
productivity actually
dropped below those who'd gotten
zilch.
DAN ARIELY: In total, by giving
people $30
bonus, Intel lost almost 5
percent of productivity.
That's a lot. Now, think about
it. You give
money because you think this
would increase
motivation. It actually
decreases motivation.
The real issue is, how much
goodwill do you
invest in the work? And goodwill
is not something
that we can buy with money. It's
very hard
to buy goodwill with money.
PAUL SOLMAN: Ariely has
highlighted another
payoff using, of all things,
origami.
It's already a little sloppy.
DAN ARIELY: Indeed.
PAUL SOLMAN: But you have got
time constraints,
so...
DAN ARIELY: I see. You're doing
it for me.
You're being sloppy for me.
That's so kind
of you.
PAUL SOLMAN: I am. I am.
There's pride in your own hard
work, regardless
of outcome.
Anyway, that's good enough.
DAN ARIELY: You put some effort
into it. It
doesn't look like the one in the
book.
PAUL SOLMAN: No.
DAN ARIELY: But it's uniquely
yours. And the
effort that's gone into folding
it and crumpling
it is uniquely a combination of
this magical
moment between you and this
piece of paper.
(LAUGHTER)
PAUL SOLMAN: Right.
DAN ARIELY: Now, in the
experiment, we came
to people, we said, look, so,
this origami
actually belongs to us, but, if
you're interested,
we will sell it to you.
So, for example, if it was 10
cents, would
you buy it or not?
PAUL SOLMAN: Yes. Yes.
DAN ARIELY: Ninety cents?
PAUL SOLMAN: A buck. It's got
character. It's
got a little runny nose. It's
definitely unique,
I would say.
(LAUGHTER)
PAUL SOLMAN: Unique.
DAN ARIELY: There you go.
And then if I came from the
outside and I
look at it, I would look at the
same unique
features in a different way, and
I would basically
say, I'm willing to pay maybe 10
cents.
What we found is that people who
build it
were willing to pay more than
five times more
than the people who didn't.
PAUL SOLMAN: Ariely has dubbed
this attachment
to things we have made ourselves
the Ikea
effect, and he says it can be
harnessed by
employers.
DAN ARIELY: If you get people to
feel that
they are putting something, that
they are
creating it and so on, their
love for the
project would increase. The more
something
is yours, the more you're
willing to invest
in it.
So, these are Bionicles, little
LEGO robots.
PAUL SOLMAN: But it's then more
demotivating
when others devalue that hard
work, as in
this experiment in which Ariely
paid participants
to build these characters.
And one of these is like a
wrap-around thing
here. Hold on. Where do these
go? Oh, these
guys go at the end of this.
What ages is this for, by the
way?
DAN ARIELY: Seven to 14.
PAUL SOLMAN: Seven to 14, so I'm
out of the
age range, so...
DAN ARIELY: Yes, after 14, it
becomes increasingly
harder.
(LAUGHTER)
DAN ARIELY: And let's say you
finished, right?
PAUL SOLMAN: OK.
DAN ARIELY: I have it. And as
you start building
the second one, I break this
into pieces.
I'm just doing it here next to
you. And then
I say, would you like to build
another one,
the third one?
PAUL SOLMAN: Right.
DAN ARIELY: And if you say yes,
I don't bring
a third box in. I give you the
one that you
just built, and I disassembled.
PAUL SOLMAN: Oh, that's cruel.
In-your-face Bionicle
dismemberment sure demotivated
me, and, it turns out, the
study's participants.
DAN ARIELY: Very quickly, they
said no more,
this is not worth my time.
This is what happens when we
destroy people's
work in front of their eyes, or
when we don't
let their work reach any
fruition. So, imagine
that you're working on some
PowerPoint presentation,
and I say, we're not going to
present it to
anybody, or you're working on a
project, and
I cancel your project. I just
basically let
you work, but I don't let the
product of the
work shine.
PAUL SOLMAN: Too often, says
Ariely, firms
kill motivation by failing to
notice what
workers really care about. And
yet it's so
obvious.
DAN ARIELY: The things that
motivate us are
to help other people, to feel
that we're useful,
to feel that we're getting
better, to feel
that we are kind of living to
our potential,
to get a sense of meaning. All
of those things
are positive.
PAUL SOLMAN: And, above all,
connection to
others. Just ask people what
most gratifies
them, Ariely suggested.
MAN: Watching my wife do things
that are completely
outrageous.
MAN: Taking care of my family.
WOMAN: My children.
WOMAN: Watching my son dance.
PAUL SOLMAN: And, in my own
case, what keeps
me doing this job, connecting
with folks like
Dan Ariely.
That's cute.
DAN ARIELY: How come the
Japanese didn't think
about this, right?
(LAUGHTER)
PAUL SOLMAN: This is economics
correspondent
Paul Solman, trying to connect
with you from
New York.
It's a swan displaying. I have
got a whole
story in my mind now.
ALISON STEWART: Online, we have
more from
Dan Ariely. Read an excerpt from
his book
where he recalls helping a burn
victim by
sharing his experience.
That's at PBS.org/NewsHour.
JUDY WOODRUFF: As Vice President
Biden said
earlier, innovations in genetics
could be
crucial to finding cures for
diseases like
cancer.
One of the most significant
developments in
this field is the newly
discovered ability
to modify the very genes in our
DNA. The technique
is known by the acronym CRISPR.
William Brangham has our
conversation.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: CRISPR is a
technique that
allows scientists to go into the
DNA of a
plant or an animal or even a
human being and
remove or replace a small part
of that organism's
genetic code.
This technique, which can be
used to improve
crops, eliminate genetic
diseases, or specifically
target the viruses and pathogens
that have
killed billion, could be a
revolutionary advancement.
The potential for CRISPR is
described in the
recent issue of The New Yorker.
The story
is called "Rewriting the Code of
Life."
And I'm joined now by its
author, New Yorker
staff writer Michael Specter. He
joins me
from California.
Michael Specter, welcome.
In your story, you profile a
young scientist
named Kevin Esvelt. And I want
to quote a
line from your story. You say
that Esvelt
directs the -- quote --
"sculpting evolution
group at MIT, where he and his
colleagues
are attempting to design
molecular tools capable
of fundamentally altering the
natural world."
I mean, that's a pretty
extraordinary set
of ambitions. What are they
trying to do?
MICHAEL SPECTER, The New Yorker:
You know,
they're trying to look out the
problems we
have in health, in crops in a
variety of ways,
and rewrite DNA, which is the
basic code of
life, so that it can make us
healthier, safer,
protect crops, protect trees,
protect endangered
species.
It's a tremendously energetic
and ambitious
idea. And it has -- like all
wonderfully ambitious
ideas, it has great risks, too.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: You report on
a particular
experiment they're running up in
Nantucket
trying to target Lyme disease.
Can you explain what they're
hoping to do
there?
MICHAEL SPECTER: Mostly, people
think about
Lyme disease in deer. And there
is a relationship.
But the real reservoir for Lyme
is the white-footed
mouse. At Kevin Esvelt at MIT
said, gee, let's
rewrite the DNA of the mouse so
that it is
resistant to the Lyme tick, so
when a Lyme
tick bites it, it doesn't
matter.
And when you do that, you sort
of break this
chain of transmission between
mice and deer
and humans. And if you did that
enough, and
if you really rewrote the DNA --
mice are
not that rapid, but they're
relatively rapid
at reproducing -- and you can
quite easily
see a way in which you would get
rid of that
disease.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: I mean, as you
describe
it in this piece, CRISPR is
really putting
us in the driver's seat for
evolution, and
not only to control, in some
ways, evolution,
but to accelerate evolution.
Am I understanding that this
just seems to
be a tremendously -- tremendous
potential
for this?
MICHAEL SPECTER: I think the
particularly
revolutionary thing here is the
combination
of CRISPR, which is an editing
program -- it's
like editing something on your
computer so
that you can cut and paste words
-- combining
that with this phenomenon called
gene drive.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Gene drive?
And gene drive...
MICHAEL SPECTER: Yes.
Gene drive is something that
scientists have
known about for a long time. We
all are supposed
to get one copy of a gene from
each of our
parents. And that's usually what
happens.
That's Mendelian genetics.
But every once in a while,
there's something
called a selfless gene. A gene
figures out
a way to be tricky, to be
counterfeit, to
cram itself in where it ought
not be.
And a guy named Austin Burt, who
teaches at
Imperial College in London,
figured this out
sometime ago. And he basically
said, gee,
if we could use those selfish
elements the
way we wanted, we could
interrupt some things.
We could make malarial
mosquitoes unable to
carry malaria.
And he named a bunch of things
like that.
But it was theoretical then,
because they
didn't have this fantastic tool.
Now you have
the tool and you have this
phenomenon. And
when you put them together, you
can really
envision doing this. And, in
fact, it's being
done in labs.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: As you write
in the piece,
you say that CRISPR could
enormously improve
the world, but it could also
endanger the
world.
How could gene editing endanger
the world?
MICHAEL SPECTER: Well, I am not
an alarmist,
but if you can reedit the genes
of a mosquito
so that it can't carry malaria,
you can also
reedit the genes of a mosquito
so that it
carries something really bad
and...
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Use it as a
weapon?
MICHAEL SPECTER: Sure.
You don't have to be a science
fiction writer
anymore to believe that it would
be possible
to engineer a species -- and the
mosquito,
our deadliest foe, is an
excellent example
-- to transmit something bad.
We're very focused on being able
to break
the transmission of this
terrible thing, malaria,
and also Zika and dengue and
many other things,
but the truth is, that could
happen.
And another thing that could
happen is mistakes
get made. When you're talking
about editing
DNA, you're talking about
changing a species.
And that's not a minor thing.
That's a fundamental,
powerful choice. And it will
require some
tremendous forethought.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: So, how are
researchers,
policy-makers talking about
this, thinking
about this? How do they propose
that we manage
this awesome technology?
MICHAEL SPECTER: Well, I
actually think researchers
are doing a fairly good job of
trying to think
this out.
And what that mostly means is,
they're working
in the labs, but they're very
aggressively
reaching out to communities. I
don't think
policy-makers so far have a
clue. I mean,
they don't know what's coming.
They're so
far behind in regulation, it's
even difficult
to understand how you would even
talk about
regulating this technology.
But with the malaria, Austin
Burt, who I mentioned,
runs something called Target
Malaria. And
he and a large group of people
are working
on editing enough of these
mosquitoes so that
they wouldn't be able to
transmit malaria.
And he's in Africa already,
years before he
would ever send a mosquito
there, talking
to people, teaching people on
the ground what
the choices are, so they
themselves can make
this choice.
This isn't a case where a bunch
of Western
scientists are going to fly in
somewhere with
400 million mosquitoes and
release them and
say, congratulations.
But there is the possibility of
getting people
to understand this and make
their own decisions.
And if it worked, getting rid of
malaria is
a big deal, and it would also
actually be
cheap, because there's no
vaccines, there's
no drugs, there's no coming
back.
We're not there yet, but it's
certainly possible.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: All right, the
article is
"Rewriting the Code of Life."
Michael Specter, thank you so
much.
MICHAEL SPECTER: My pleasure.
ALISON
ALISON STEWART: And a
clarification to our
story about the administration's
release of
four additional inmates from the
detention
facility at Guantanamo Bay,
Cuba. Due to an
editing error, we reported that
35 inmates
remain at Guantanamo. The
correct number is
55. We regret the error. in the
film, Katherine
Johnson is assigned to an
all-white department
run by Kevin costner's
character, a composite
of three NASA administrators.
Can she handle geometry?
Absolutely.
And I speak.
Think you can find me this data?
When you're done watching it you
can realize
that while the best idea got to
the top, how
many ideas aren't getting there?
What do we
keep down? My job was to keep
NASA going and
I naively was thinking that the
best idea
was getting to me. That we were
somehow above
this but certainly we weren't so
but you can
look at our movie, see where
we're at, and
you can come out of the movie
and you can
turn the mirror around and ask
yourself where
you think we are?
What's unfair is having the
responsibility
of a supervisor, but not the
title or pay.
JEFFREY BROWN: Octavia Spencer
received a
golden globe nomination for her
supporting
role playing dorothy vaughan, a
mathematician
who became an expert in an early
electronic
comPuting language. In the film
she's effectively
managing the department of
African American
women without being recognized
for it. Did
that feel like ancient history?
I sound like a supervisor, don't
i?
It still resonates. There's
unfinished business
in our society. We can talk
about gender parity
all day. Women in positions that
aren't really
being recognized financially and
so no, it
didn't feel like it was an idea
whose time
had passed.
JEFFREY BROWN: It's a human
story, revolving
around complicated math and
aeronautics. Director
theodore melfi said he took some
dramatic
liberties, but worked hard to
get the science
right.
We took great pride in how much
NASA was involved
and how much we paid attention
to what they
had to say. They read script
draft after script
draft, poured through every
single line in
the movie, I'm very proud of the
fact that
NASA says, they're very proud.
How legitimate
it is and how
JEFFREY BROWN: Music, too,
references the
era, but it's all new, written
by superstar
musician and producer pharrell
Williams, who
grew up in this part of Virginia
and felt
a personal connection to the
subject.
Space and NASA, two subjects
that I have been
obsessed with since I was a
child. I used
to stare out of the window pane
at the stars
every night. Every night.
JEFFREY BROWN: Thinking?
I didn't know what it was, I
didn't understand
it. I used to ask my mom all the
time, you
know, what are the stars? How
many are there?
How far does the black part go?
JEFFREY BROWN: Pharrell is also
one of the
film's producers. And it's an
important one
to him.
Aw man, the success in this film
is when young
girls, no matter what color, can
receive this
message beyond the suppression
that they endure
everyday. To see that they can
do anything
that they want, including
science, including
technology, engineering and
math. That's like,
that's the success.
JEFFREY BROWN: The new film
comes in the year
following the Oscars- so-white
controversy
at the Academy Awards, in which
no people
of color were nominated in
leading or supporting
roles. Does one film make a big
difference?
Or what do you think has to
happen within
the world you work in?
Just gotta keep working.
yes and I think that the
emphasis is placed
in the wrong spot. The academy
is at the very
end of the whole cycle of the
year and how
movies get made. I think what
people fail
to understand is it's not the
Oscars, it's
the decision-makers who
green-light movies.
That's what needs to change.
So it just goes to show, we
still have work
to do. I'm not going to complain
about it.
I see the issue. What am I going
to keep doing?
Leading movies. You're not going
to ignore
me. I'm not going anywhere.
Right, Kevin?
Kevin's Puting me in his next
movie.
JEFFREY BROWN: "Hidden Figures"
opens nationwide
this weekend. For the "PBS
NewsHour," I'm
Jeffrey Brown.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Not one to miss.
Learn more
about the NASA heroes of "Hidden
Figures"
and the discrimination they
faced on our Web
site: PBS.org/NewsHour.
ALISON STEWART: Finally tonight:
A movie opening
widely this weekend tells a
little known piece
of history about the history of
the early
days of spaceflight and the
crucial role played
behind the scenes by
African-American women
who acted as mathematicians and
engineers.
The film is called "Hidden
Figures." It's
up for a number of honors during
this awards
season, including two Golden
Globes on Sunday
night.
Jeffrey Brown has a look at the
film and that
history.
ACTOR: You have identification
on you?
TARAJI P. HENSON, Actress: We're
just on our
way to work.
OCTAVIA SPENCER, Actress: At
NASA, sir.
ACTOR: I had no idea they hired.
OCTAVIA SPENCER: There are quite
a few women
working in the space program.
JEFFREY BROWN: It's a story
about an agency
that reached for the stars, but
was mired
in racial and gender barriers
still prevalent
on the ground.
"Hidden Figures" is based on the
real-life
stories of three black woman who
worked in
mostly segregated quarters at
NASA's Langley
Center in Virginia in the 1950s
and '60s.
The film focuses on efforts to
launch the
first American, the late John
Glenn, into
orbit.
ACTOR: Let me ask you, if you
were a white
male, would you wish to be an
engineer?
JANELLE MONAE, Actress: I
wouldn't have to.
I would already be one.
JEFFREY BROWN: Janelle Monae,
the singer-turned-actress,
plays Mary Jackson, struggling
to get her
license as an engineer. Like the
others involved,
this history was new to Monae.
JANELLE MONAE: I was excited. I
said, wow,
we're going to finally be
celebrating women
not just for their beauty, but
for their brilliance.
And I got excited. And then once
I found out
that they indeed were part of
the space program
at NASA, it became a personal
responsibility
to me to make sure that no young
girl, or
no human being, no American, you
know, went
through life not knowing of
these true American
heroes.
JEFFREY BROWN: Mary Jackson
would spend 34
years at NASA and help many who
followed.
JANELLE MONAE: She found out
that the women
and minorities were being paid
significantly
less than their male white
counterparts. And
she, along with a couple of
other colleagues,
took this to NASA. And, you
know, NASA being
the progressive place and the
place that listened,
she helped advance more women's
careers and
more minorities' careers in STEM
at NASA during
that time.
So, I thought that was just so
remarkable,
and I'm so honored to play such
a woman.
TARAJI P. HENSON: This one is
important. This
one is important on a deep
level, because
it's a part of history that has
been overlooked.
You know, this is more important
than anything
I have done in my career.
JEFFREY BROWN: Taraji P. Henson
plays Katherine
Johnson, a math prodigy who
worked as a so-called
computer. This was just as
machine computers
were arriving, executing by hand
the difficult
and tedious equations needed to
make the science
of spaceflight work.
When she first read the script,
Henson saw
the story in very personal
terms.
TARAJI P. HENSON: I was upset,
because a dream
had been stolen from me. Had I
known these
women existed, maybe I would've
dreamed to
be a rocket scientist. But
growing up, there
was a universal understanding
that math and
science wasn't for girls. It was
for boys.
And then I felt a great
responsibility for
all the little girls who thought
math or had
been told raise a baby, get in
the kitchen
and cook, or don't dream to be a
rocket scientist.
MAN: Katherine G. Johnson
refused to be limited
by society's expectations.
JEFFREY BROWN: The real
Katherine Johnson
is still alive, and in 2015
received the Medal
of Freedom from President Obama.
In the film, she is assigned to
an all-white
department run by Kevin
Costner's character,
a composite of three NASA
administrators.
KEVIN COSTNER, Actor: Would she
handle analytic
geometry?
ACTRESS: Absolutely. And she
speaks.
TARAJI P. HENSON: Yes, sir, I
do.
KEVIN COSTNER: Which one?
TARAJI P. HENSON: Both, geometry
and speaking.
KEVIN COSTNER: Ruth, get me --
you think you
can find me the Frenet frame for
this data
using the Gram-Schmidt...
TARAJI P. HENSON:
Orthogonalization algorithm?
Yes, sir.
I prefer it over Euclidian
coordinates.
KEVIN COSTNER: When you're done
watching it,
you can realize that, while the
best idea
got to the top, how many ideas
aren't getting
there? What do we keep down?
My job was to keep NASA going.
And I naively
was thinking that the best idea
was getting
to me, that we were somehow
above this. But,
certainly, we weren't.
So, you can look at our movie,
see where we're
at, and you can come out of the
movie and
you can turn the mirror around
and ask yourself
where you think we are.
OCTAVIA SPENCER: What's not fair
is having
the responsibility of a
supervisor, but not
the title or pay.
JEFFREY BROWN: Octavia Spencer
received a
Golden Globe nomination for her
supporting
role playing Dorothy Vaughan, a
mathematician
who became an expert in an early
electronic
computing language.
In the film ,she's effectively
managing the
department of African-American
women without
being recognized for it.
OCTAVIA SPENCER: Have some
respect. Get your
damn feet off my dashboard. This
isn't your
living room.
I sound like a supervisor, don't
I?
JANELLE MONAE: A mean old, salty
one.
TARAJI P. HENSON: With
authority, no question.
OCTAVIA SPENCER: It still
resonates. There's
unfinished business in our
society.
We could talk about gender
parity all day,
women in positions that aren't
really being
recognized financially. And so,
no, it didn't
feel like it was an idea whose
time had passed.
JEFFREY BROWN: It's a human
story revolving
around complicated math and
aeronautics.
Director Theodore Melfi said he
took some
dramatic liberties, but worked
hard to get
the science right.
THEODORE MELFI, Director: We
took great pride
in how much NASA was involved
and how much
we paid attention to what they
had to say.
They read script draft after
script draft,
pored through every single line
in the movie.
I was -- I'm very proud of the
fact that NASA
says they're very proud how
legitimate it
is.
JEFFREY BROWN: The music, too,
references
the era, but it's all new,
written by superstar
musician and producer Pharrell
Williams, who
grew up in this part of Virginia
and felt
a personal connection to the
subject.
PHARRELL WILLIAMS, Musician:
Space and NASA,
two subjects that I have been
obsessed with
since I was a child. I used to
stare out of
the windowpane at the stars
every night, every
night.
JEFFREY BROWN: Thinking?
PHARRELL WILLIAMS: I didn't know
what it was.
I didn't understand it. I used
to ask my mom
all the time, you know, what are
the stars?
How many are there? How far does
the black
part go?
JEFFREY BROWN: Pharrell Williams
is also one
of the film's producers. And
it's an important
one to him.
PHARRELL WILLIAMS: Oh, man, the
success in
this film is when young girls,
no matter what
color, can receive this message
beyond the
suppression that they endure
everyday, to
see that they can do anything
that they want,
including science, including
technology, engineering
and math. That's like -- that's
the success.
JEFFREY BROWN: The new film
comes in the year
following the Oscars-so-white
controversy
at the Academy Awards, in which
no people
of color were nominated in
leading or supporting
roles.
Does one film make a big
difference? Or what
do you think has to happen
within the world
you work in?
TARAJI P. HENSON: Just got to
keep working.
OCTAVIA SPENCER: Yes.
And I think the emphasis is
placed in the
wrong spot. The Academy is at
the very end
of the whole cycle of the year
and how movies
get made. I think what people
fail to understand
is, it's not the Oscars. It's
the decision-makers
who green-light movies. That's
what needs
to change.
TARAJI P. HENSON: So, it just
goes to show,
we still have work to do. I'm
not going to
complain about it. I see the
issue. What am
I going to keep doing? Leading
movies. You're
not going to ignore me. I'm not
going anywhere,
right, Kevin?
(LAUGHTER)
TARAJI P. HENSON: Kevin's
putting me in his
next movie.
JEFFREY BROWN: "Hidden Figures"
opens nationwide
this weekend.
For the "PBS NewsHour," I'm
Jeffrey Brown.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Not one to miss.
Learn more about the NASA heroes
of "Hidden
Figures" and the discrimination
they faced
on our Web site,
PBS.org/NewsHour.
ALISON STEWART: And a
clarification to a story
about the administration's
release of four
additional inmates from the
detention facility
at Guantanamo Bay, Cuba.
Due to an editing error, we
reported that
35 inmates remain at Guantanamo.
The correct
number is 55. We regret the
error.
And that's the "NewsHour" for
tonight. I'm
Alison Stewart.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And I'm Judy
Woodruff.
Join us online and again right
here tomorrow
evening for my conversation with
Secretary
of State John Kerry, plus the
analysis of
Mark Shields and David Brooks.
For all of us at the "PBS
NewsHour," thank
you, and good night.
For all of us at the "PBS
NewsHour," thank
you, and good night.